Context	Environment	Air	"Flow patterns, rates"	"Airflow moves pollution, which can protect workers but can also affect communities. It can also increase dust entrainment. "	None	ESIA
Context	Environment	Geology	Physical landscape - landscape and important landmarks	"Populations are often deeply connected - emotionally, psychologically, and religiously - to major features of their landscape. Affecting these features can affect social dynamics and sometimes human rights"	Land	ESIA
Context	Environment	Groundwater	Uses	"Knowing whether and how local residents use groundwater sources alerts assessors to whether there are human rights risks associated with modifying groundwater quality or quantity. The most common uses for groundwater in rural areas are domestic and agricultural wells. Relevant users include anyone whose activities might be affected by project activities -- sometimes these individuals can be quite far from the project area, depending on groundwater flow rates and patterns (identified in the topic ""Groundwater --> Sources"")"	None	ESIA
Context	Water	Groundwater	Conveyance systems	"This duplicates an indicator to ensure effects are captured in a specific ""Right to Water"" analysis. In urban areas, water conveyance systems are municipal grids. In rural areas, some wells may be connected by canals or pipes to provide easier water access."	Water	ESIA
Context	Water	Non-Operations Water	"Depletion rates, changes in flow in recent years"	"Water used by project area inhabitants but not the corporate operation requires monitoring, because hydrology is not often well-understood by communities and stresses on locally-used sources can increase perceived insecurity when a new (corporate) water user arrives. Depletion rates refer to declines in stream flow, pond water levels, and groundwater tables.  Human, climatological and industrial impacts on water sources may reduce (or appear to reduce) availability of water. Special emphasis is on community sources of water for drinking and agriculture/husbandry. "	Water	ESIA; national hydrology data
Context	Water	Water Management	Distribution allocations - by neighborhood	"This examines disparities in water delivery. In water-scarce locations, water outages are common. If these are deliberately carried out, distribution schedules (including number of hours of water access per week, disaggregated by neighborhood) should be listed"	Water	Water management company public reporting; news reports
Context	Water	Water Management	Water aid to low income households - noncitizen	"Subsidy rates may not apply to non-citizens, which could affect the right to water for foreign nationals. "	Water	Ministry of Water or water management company data; Refugee agency data
Context	Water	Water Management	Water budget for operation and maintenance	"Water systems can be costly for a state - the mechanisms for funding municipal water, and the budget allocations can indicate whether water infrastructure is adequately funded. "	Water	Ministry of Water or water management company data
Context	Health	Access and Infrastructure	"Accessibility, appropriateness for minorities"	"Medical treatment must account for cultural sensitivities of population subgroups. For example, absence of female healthcare providers in cultures where women cannot be seen by men are not rights respectful. "	None	Sociologial Research Produced by Institutions and Universities; Local Interviews
Context	Health	Access and Infrastructure	Percentage of pregnant women seen +1/+4 times - Local	Availability of treatment nationally is contrasted with availability of treatment locally	None	ESIA; field interviews with local clinicians
Context	Health	Underlying Determinants	Under-5 mortality rates	"Infant mortality is often considered the single most effective measure of public health efficiency. IMR is linked to immunization, access to child and maternal services, access to medicine, access to safe water and sanitation, and maternal nutrition"	None	UNICEF Statistics http://www.unicef.org/statistics/index_step2.php
Context	Labor	Discrimination	Groups at risk for marginalization in employment - HIV	"Cultural, racial, gender or other prevalent sources of discriminatory beliefs can affect hiring for particular population subgroups. HIV status is among these sources of discrimination."	HIV	ESIA; Field-based Interviews
Context	Labor	Exploitive Practices	Child labor/forced labor in the area/supply chains	"Local industries and local supply chains merit scrutiny anywhere that local hiring is prioritized. Forced labor and child labor are rarely documented quantitatively and are often addressed together by NGOs and government. Where separate child labor and forced labor conditions and documentation is available, this should be divided into two subtopics. "	None	US Trafficking in Persons Reports http://www.state.gov/g/tip/rls/tiprpt/2010/142761.htm; International Organization for Migration
Context	Labor	Exploitive Practices	Percent of children ages 5-14 in workforce	Child labor is generally measured through this or a comparable indicator	None	http://www.childinfo.org/ontext	Labor	Labor Laws	Sexual harassment laws	"The existence of such laws, their implementation, and the extent to which they apply across the formal and informal job sectors, are important indicators of discrimination risks within the workplace and in communities surrounding corporate operations.  "	None	ILO http://www.ilo.org/dyn/natlex/natlex_browse.byCountry?p_lang=en
Context	Labor	Labor Laws	Subcontractor Laws	"Subcontractor laws should hold contractors to the standards of the international company overseeing operations. Attention should be paid to who is held accountable for failures, and who is charged with oversight duties. "	None	ILO http://www.ilo.org/dyn/natlex/natlex_browse.byCountry?p_lang=en
Context	Labor	Nondiscrimination	Groups at risk for marginalization in employment	"Marginalization is an extremely localized process. Common sources of marginalization are gender, age, marital status, sexual orientation, disability, ethnicity, religion, race, and class. Marginalization can be a result of ""structural inequalities"" within a society, whereby a population subgroup lacks qualifications for jobs because their opportunities for training and education have been curtailed by their social status. "	None	ESIA; Field-based Interviews
Context	Labor	Nondiscrimination	Local holidays	Awareness of religious days can ensure that a company respects human rights to favorable working conditions and freedom of religion.	None	ESIA; Field-based Interviews
Context	Social/ Economic	Indigenous Peoples	Indigenous legal and citizenship status	Indigenous groups not offered citizenship may experience an array of discriminatory treatment and outcomes.	Indigenous	"Anthropological reports, field visit"
Operation	Social/ Economic	Demography and Economy	Employment of locals - shift from subsistence farming	"If employment opportunities shift the workforce away from agricultural activities, there is a possibility for disparate impact (e.g. men might take jobs, leaving women to do double the farm labor, which could result in children staying home from school to help with harvests). "	Land	"Field visit, ESIA"
Operation	Social/ Economic	Demography and Economy	Population influx significantly increases food prices	"During the price survey (described above in context), assessors should also ask whether prices are stable. If there is a history of food price instability, it may be exacerbated by the arrival of job-seekers. "	None	Firsthand Accounts; Interviews with Communities; Price Survey
Operation	Social/ Economic	Land the Project Occupies	Houses and structures associated with project development	"This subtopic describes the structures - houses, storage buildings, facilities etc - developed for operations. "	Land	ESIA; Interviews With Community Members
Operation	Social/ Economic	Land the Project Occupies	Houses and structures predating the project	"This subtopic describes the structures - houses, stables, food storage buildings, etc - destroyed for project development. Additional information on the number of residents affected, the types of structures destroyed, and mitigation actions by the project are included."	Land	ESIA; Interviews With Community Members
Company	Health	Community	Community health and safety policy	"Community health and safety can be affected by operations-related traffic, by direct risks from hazardous materials on site, by security procedures implemented by a company, or by indirect risks associated with population influx. Company policies that recognize the complex and systemic changes that can accompany infrastructure development in low-income areas are betterprepared to manage such changes. "	None	Corporate policies
Company	Health	Community	Health monitoring system for communities	Companies that have no standards for ensuring that health is not negatively impacted cannot state authoritatively that they have no negative health impacts. 	None	Corporate policies; CSR staff interviews
Company	Health	Community	History of collaboration with existing health workers	A track record of collaboration with healthworkers is an indicator of a company's recognition of its interactions with public health. 	None	Corporate policies; CSR staff interviews
Company	Labor	Discrimination	History of discriminatory behaviors or outcomes	"Human resources data can indicate whether a company has successfully overcome discrimination issues entrenched in areas of operations. Gender balance in hiring, and wage parity between genders and disparate ethnic (or linguistic) groups, are indicators. Often achieving such equality requires targeted hiring and training programs to overcome the barriers that vulnerable and marginalized populations experience in discriminatory societies. "	None	News reports; HR data
Company	Labor	Unions	Free speech and assembly policies & practices	"Company policies should clearly state if there are views or activities employees are expected to avoid. These policies should not infringe on the right to join a union, protest peacefully or support political opposition groups."	None	Corporate policies; news reports
Company	Labor	Unions	Relations with unions	"A company's track record with unions indicates its ability to resolve labor disputes. History of strikes, preponderance of unionized workers across operations, and history of addressing labor demands are included. "	None	Company financial reporting; news reports
Company	Political/ Legal	Grievances	Company policies regarding environmental and social impacts of products	"Petroleum companies may establish policies about climate change; food and beverage companies may establish policies about public health - these policies contribute to corporate governance, and companies can be held accountable for violations of them. "	None	Corporate policies
Company	Political/ Legal	Security	Security Policies 	"Companies should have an established policy for ensuring the security of their operations and workforce. In conflict affected or complex settings, security policies require robustness to ensure that security forces do not contribute to human rights abuses. The Voluntary Prinicples on Security and Human Rights are best practice principles for companies hiring security; the International Code of Conduct is best practice for the security companies contracted and subcontracted."	None	Corporate policies
Company	Social/ Economic	Marginalized Groups	Community relocation/ resettlement policy & practices	"Companies whose operations are likely to require the displacement of populations should have a detailed resettlement policy that builds on IFC performance standards and ensures that resettled people do not experience declines in their economic, social, political, cultural or environmental welfare. "	None	Corporate policies; news reports; field interviews